WHAT YOU SHOULD ALREADY KNOW
Try these five questions before you read this
chapter.
1 What is the difference between memory and
storage?
2 Why is it necessary to have both internal and
external memory/storage devices?
3 Can you recognise the memory/storage
devices on the right?
4 What is the difference between online and
offline storage?
5 What is the difference between data access
time and data transfer rate when using
memory and storage devices?
3 Hardware

Key terms
Memory cache – high speed memory external to processor
which stores data which the processor will need again.
Random access memory (RAM) – primary memory unit
that can be written to and read from.
Read-only memory (ROM) – primary memory unit that
can only be read from.

Dynamic RAM (DRAM) – type of RAM chip that needs
to be constantly refreshed.
Static RAM (SRAM) – type of RAM chip that uses
flip-flops and does not need refreshing.
Refreshed – requirement to charge a component to
retain its electronic state.

3.1 Computers and their components
▲ Figure 3.1 Memory/storage devices

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 68 26/04/19 7:27 AM

69
3.1 Computers and their components
3

3.1.1 Types of memory and storage
Computers require some form of memory and storage.
Memory is usually referred to as the internal devices which the computer can
access directly. This memory can be the user’s workspace, temporary data or
data that is key to running the computer.
Storage devices allow users to store applications, data and files. The user’s data
is stored permanently and they can change it or read it as they wish. Storage
needs to be larger than internal memory since the user may wish to store large
files (such as music files or photographic images).
Storage devices can also be removable to allow data, for example, to be
transferred between computers. Removable devices allow a user to store
important data in a different building in case of data loss.
However, all of this has become a lot less important with the advent of
technology such as ‘data drop’ (which uses Bluetooth) and cloud storage.
Internal memory includes components such as registers (which are part of the
processor). There is also memory cache (which is external to the processor);
this is used to store data which the processor will probably need to use again.

Programmable ROM (PROM) – type of ROM chip that
can be programmed once.
Erasable PROM (EPROM) – type of ROM that can be
programmed more than once using ultraviolet (UV) light.
Hard disk drive (HDD) – type of magnetic storage device
that uses spinning disks.
Latency – the lag in a system; for example, the time to
find a track on a hard disk, which depends on the time
taken for the disk to rotate around to its read-write head.
Fragmented – storage of data in non-consecutive sectors;
for example, due to editing and deletion of old data.
Removable hard disk drive – portable hard disk drive
that is external to the computer; it can be connected
via a USB part when required; often used as a device to
back up files and data.
Solid state drive (SSD) – storage media with no moving
parts that relies on movement of electrons.
Electronically erasable programmable read-only
memory (EEPROM) – read-only (ROM) chip that can
be modified by the user, which can then be erased and
written to repeatedly using pulsed voltages.
Flash memory – a type of EEPROM, particularly suited
to use in drives such as SSDs, memory cards and
memory sticks.
Optical storage – CDs, DVDs and Blu-rayTM discs that
use laser light to read and write data.
Dual layering – used in DVDs; uses two recording layers.
Birefringence – a reading problem with DVDs caused
by refraction of laser light into two beams.
Binder 3D printing – 3D printing method that uses a
two-stage pass; the first stage uses dry powder and the
second stage uses a binding agent.

Direct 3D printing – 3D printing technique where print
head moves in the x, y and z directions. Layers of melted
material are built up using nozzles like an inkjet printer.
Digital to analogue converter (DAC) – needed to
convert digital data into electric currents that can drive
motors, actuators and relays, for example.
Analogue to digital converter (ADC) – needed to
convert analogue data (read from sensors, for example)
into a form understood by a computer.
Organic LED (OLED) – uses movement of electrons
between cathode and anode to produce an on-screen
image. It generates its own light so no back lighting
required.
Screen resolution – number of pixels in the horizontal
and vertical directions on a television/computer screen.
Touch screen – screen on which the touch of a finger or
stylus allows selection or manipulation of a screen image;
they usually use capacitive or resistive technology.
Capacitive – type of touch screen technology based
on glass layers forming a capacitor, where fingers
touching the screen cause a change in the electric field.
Resistive – type of touch screen technology. When
a finger touches the screen, the glass layer touches
the plastic layer, completing the circuit and causing a
current to flow at that point.
Virtual reality headset – apparatus worn on the head
that covers the eyes like a pair of goggles. It gives the
user the ‘feeling of being there’ by immersing them
totally in the virtual reality experience.
Sensor – input device that reads physical data from its
surroundings.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 69 26/04/19 7:27 AM

70
3 Hardware
3

Figure 3.2 summarises the types of memory and storage devices covered in this
chapter.

secondary storage
hard disk drive (HDD)
solid state drive (SSD)
removable devices:
- DVD/CD/Blu-ray
- flash memory stick
- hard disk drive

primary memory
RAM
ROM

▲ Figure 3.2 Memory and storage devices
Primary memory
Primary memory is the part of computer memory which can be accessed directly
from the CPU and, as Figure 3.2 shows, contains the random access memory
(RAM) and read-only memory (ROM) memory chips. Primary memory allows
the processor to access applications and services temporarily stored in memory
locations. The structure of primary memory is shown in Figure 3.3.

Primary memory

RAM ROM
SRAM DRAM PROM EPROM EEPROM
▲ Figure 3.3 Structure of primary memory
All computer systems come with some form of RAM. These memory devices
are not really random, it refers to the fact that any memory location can be
accessed independent of which memory location was last used. Access time to
locate data is much faster in RAM than in secondary devices. RAM can also be
» written to or read from, and the data stored can be changed by the user or
by the computer
» used to store data, files, part of an application or part of the operating
system currently in use
» volatile (memory contents are lost on powering off the computer).
In general, the larger the RAM, the faster the computer will operate. In reality,
RAM never runs out of memory, it continues to operate but just becomes slower
and slower as more data is stored. As RAM becomes ‘full’, the processor has to
continually access the secondary data storage devices to overwrite old data on
RAM with new data. By increasing the RAM size, the number of times this has
to be done is considerably reduced, thus making the computer operate more
quickly.
There are currently two types of RAM technology, dynamic RAM (DRAM) and
static RAM (SRAM).

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 70 26/04/19 7:27 AM

71
3.1 Computers and their components
3

Dynamic RAM (DRAM)
Each DRAM chip consists of a number of transistors and capacitors. Each of
these parts is tiny since a single RAM chip will contain millions of capacitors
and transistors.
» Capacitors hold the bits of information (0 or 1).
» Transistors act like switches; they allow the chip control circuitry to read the
capacitor or change the capacitor’s value.
This type of RAM needs to be constantly refreshed (that is, the capacitor
needs to be re-charged every 15 microseconds otherwise it would lose its
value). If it is not refreshed, the capacitor’s charge will leak away very quickly,
leaving every capacitor with the value 0.
DRAMs have a number of advantages over SRAMs. They:
» are much less expensive to manufacture than SRAMs
» consume less power than SRAMs
» have a higher memory capacity than SRAMs.
Static RAM (SRAM)
A major difference between SRAM and DRAM is that SRAM does not need to be
constantly refreshed.
It makes use of flip flops (see Chapter 15) which hold each bit of memory.
SRAM is much faster than DRAM when it comes to data access (typically, access
time for SRAM is 25 nanoseconds and for DRAM is 60 nanoseconds).
DRAM is the most common type of RAM used in computers, but where absolute
speed is essential, for example in the processor’s memory cache, SRAM is the
preferred technology. Memory cache is a high speed portion of the memory.
It is effective because most programs access the same data or instructions
many times. By keeping as much of this information as possible in SRAM, the
computer avoids having to access the slower DRAM.
Table 3.1 summarises the differences between DRAM and SRAM.
DRAM SRAM
n consists of a number of transistors and
capacitors
n needs to be constantly refreshed
n less expensive to manufacture than SRAM
n has a higher memory capacity than SRAM
n main memory is constructed from DRAM
n consumes more power than SRAM under
reasonable levels of access, as it needs
to be constantly refreshed

n uses flip-flops to hold each bit of
memory
n does not need to be constantly
refreshed
n has a faster data access time than DRAM
n processor memory cache makes use
of SRAM
n if accessed at a high frequency, power
usage can exceed that of DRAM

▲ Table 3.1 Differences between DRAM and SRAM
Another form of primary memory is the read-only memory (ROM). This is similar
to RAM in that it shares the same random access properties, but it cannot
be written to or changed. As the name suggests, ROM is a read-only memory
device.
ROMs are
» non-volatile (the contents are not lost after powering off the computer)
» permanent memory devices (the contents cannot be changed)

▲ Figure 3.4 Two pieces
of dynamic random access
memory (DRAM)

▲ Figure 3.5 Static RAM

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 71 26/04/19 7:27 AM

72
3 Hardware
3

» often used to store data which the computer needs to access when powering
up for the first time for example, the basic input/output system (BIOS).
Table 3.2 summarises the main differences between RAM and ROM.
RAM ROM
n temporary memory device
n volatile memory
n can be written to and read from
n used to store data, files, programs, part
of OS currently in use
n can be increased in size to improve
operational speed of a computer

n permanent memory device
n non-volatile memory device
n data stored cannot be altered
n sometimes used to store BIOS and other
data needed at start up

▲ Table 3.2 Differences between RAM and ROM
PROM and EPROM
A programmable read-only memory (PROM) is a type of ROM chip that
can be altered once. A PROM is made up of a matrix of fuses. Programming
a PROM requires the use of a PROM writer which uses an electric current to
alter specific cells by ‘burning’ fuses in the matrix. Due to the method of
programming (writing), a PROM can only be written to once. They are often
used in mobile phones and in RFID tags.
An erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM) is different to a PROM
because they use floating gate transistors and capacitors rather than fuses.
Ultra violet (UV) light is used to program an EPROM through a quartz window.
They are used in applications which are under development, such as the
programming of new games consoles.
Embedded systems
Embedded systems involve installing microprocessors into devices to enable
operations to be controlled in a more efficient way. Devices such as cookers,
refrigerators and central heating systems can now all be activated by a
web-enabled device (such as a mobile phone or tablet). The time a central
heating system switches on or off and the temperature can all be set from an
app on a mobile phone from anywhere in the world.
There are pros and cons of devices being controlled in this manner, as shown in
Table 3.3.
Pros of embedded systems Cons of embedded systems
n small in size and therefore easy to
fit into devices
n relatively low cost to make
n usually dedicated to one task,
making for simple interfaces
and often no requirement of an
operating system
n consume very little power
n very fast reaction to changing input
(operate in real time)
n with mass production comes
reliability

n difficult to upgrade devices to take
advantage of new technology
n troubleshooting faults in the device
becomes a specialist task
n although the interface can appear to be
simple, in reality it can be more confusing
(changing the time on a cooker clock can
require several steps, for example)
n any device that can be accessed over the
internet is also open to hackers, viruses,
and so on
n due to the difficulty in upgrading and fault
finding, devices are often just thrown away
rather than being repaired (wasteful)
▲ Table 3.3 Pros and cons of controlling devices with embedded systems

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 72 26/04/19 7:27 AM

73
3.1 Computers and their components
3

Secondary storage devices
Secondary storage includes storage devices that are not directly accessible by
the CPU. They are non-volatile devices which allow data to be stored as long as
required by the user. This type of storage is much larger than primary memory,
but data access time is considerably slower than RAM and ROM. All applications,
the operating system, device drivers and general files (for example, documents,
photos and music) are stored on secondary storage. The following section
discusses the various types of secondary storage that can be found on the
majority of computers. Secondary storage devices fall into three categories:
magnetic, solid state and optical.
Hard disk drives (HDD)
Hard disk drives (HDD) are still one of the most common methods used to
store data on a computer.
Data is stored in a digital format on the magnetic surfaces of the disks
(or platters, as they are frequently called). The hard disk drive will have a
number of platters which can spin at about 7000 times a second. A number
of read-write heads can access all of the surfaces in the disk drive. Normally
each platter will have two surfaces which can be used to store the data.
These read-write heads can move very quickly – typically they can move from
the centre of the disk to the edge of the disk (and back again) 50 times a
second.
Data is stored on the surface in sectors and tracks.
A sector on a given track will contain a fixed number of bytes.
Unfortunately, hard disk drives have very slow data access when compared
to, for example, RAM. Many applications require the read-write heads to
constantly seek for the correct blocks of data; this means a large number of
head movements. The effects of latency then become very significant. Latency
is defined as the time it takes for a specific block of data on a data track to
rotate around to the read-write head.
Users will sometimes notice the effect of latency when they see messages such
as, ‘Please wait’ or, at its worst, ‘not responding’.
When a file or data is stored on an HDD, the required number of sectors needed
to store the data will be allocated. However, the sectors allocated may not be
adjacent to each other. Through time, the HDD will undergo numerous deletions
and editing, which leads to sectors becoming increasingly fragmented,
resulting in a gradual deterioration of the HDD performance (in other words, it
takes longer and longer to access data). Defragmentation software can improve
on this situation by ‘tidying up’ the disk sectors.
An HDD is a direct access device; however, data in a given sector will be read
sequentially.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3A
Describe how ROM and RAM chips could be used in:
a) a microwave oven
b) a refrigerator
c) a remote-controlled model aeroplane (the movement of the aeroplane is
controlled by a hand-held device).

track

sector

▲ Figure 3.6 Tracks and
sectors on a hard disk drive

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 73 26/04/19 7:27 AM

74
3 Hardware
3

Removable hard disk drives are essentially HDDs that are external to the
computer and can be connected to the computer using one of the USB ports. In
this way, they can be used as back-up devices or as another way of transferring
files between computers.

Solid state drives (SSD)
Latency is an issue in HDDs, as discussed earlier. Solid state drives (SSD)
reduce this issue considerably. They have no moving parts and all data is
retrieved at the same rate. They do not rely on magnetic properties. The most
common type of solid state storage devices store data by controlling the
movement of electrons within NAND chips. The data is stored as 0s and 1s in
millions of tiny transistors (at each junction one transistor is called a floating
gate and the other is called a control gate) within the chip. This effectively
produces a non-volatile rewritable memory.
However, a number of solid state storage devices sometimes use electronically
erasable PROM (EEPROM) technology. The main difference is the use of NOR chips
rather than NAND. This makes them faster in operation but devices using EEPROM
are considerably more expensive than those that use NAND technology. EEPROM also
allows data to be read or erased in single bytes at a time. Use of NAND only allows
blocks of data to be read or erased. This makes EEPROM technology more useful in
certain applications where data needs to be accessed or erased in byte-size chunks.
Because of the cost implications, the majority of solid state storage devices
use NAND technology. The two are usually distinguished by the terms flash
memory (use NAND) and EEPROM (use NOR).
So, what are the main benefits of using an SSD rather than an HDD?
Solid state drives
» are more reliable (no moving parts to go wrong)
» are considerably lighter (which makes them suitable for laptops)
» do not have to ‘get up to speed’ before they work properly
» have a lower power consumption
» run much cooler than HDDs (both these points again make them very
suitable for laptop computers)
» are very thin (because they have no moving parts)
» access data considerably faster.
The main drawback of SSD is the still unknown longevity of the technology.
Most solid state storage devices are conservatively rated at only 20GB write
operations per day over a three year period – this is known as SSD endurance.
For this reason, SSD technology is not commonly used in servers, for example,
where a huge number of write operations take place every day. However, this
issue is being addressed by a number of manufacturers to improve the durability
of these solid state systems and they are rapidly becoming more common in
applications such as servers and cloud storage devices.
Note that it is also not possible to over-write existing data on a flash memory
device; it is necessary to first erase the old data and then write the new data
at the same location.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3B
The length of a track on each disk in an HDD disk pack becomes much
shorter towards the centre of the disk. Find out how manufacturers have
overcome this issue with regards to disk data capacity and data access time.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 74 26/04/19 7:27 AM

75
3.1 Computers and their components
3

Memory sticks/flash memories (also known as pen drives) use solid state
technology. They usually connect to the computer through the USB port. Their
main advantage is that they are very small, lightweight devices which make
them suitable for transferring files between computers. They can also be used
as small back-up devices for music or photo files, for example.
Complex or expensive software, such as an expert system, will often use a
memory stick as a dongle. The dongle contains additional files which are
needed to run the software. Without this dongle, the software will not work
properly. It therefore prevents illegal or unauthorised use of the software, and
also prevents copying of the software since, without the dongle, it is useless.
Optical media: CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray discs
CDs and DVDS are described as optical storage devices. Laser light is used to
read data from, and write data onto, the surface of a disk.

▲ Figure 3.7 CDs and DVDs use a single, spiral track
Both CDs and DVDs use a thin layer of metal alloy or light-sensitive organic
dye to store the data. As shown in Figure 3.7, both systems use a single, spiral
track which runs from the centre of the disk to the edge. When a disk spins, the
optical head moves to the point where the laser beam ‘contacts’ the disk surface
and follows the spiral track from the centre outwards. As with an HDD, a CD/DVD
is divided into sectors allowing direct access of data. Also, as in the case of an
HDD, the outer part of the disk runs faster than the inner part of the disk.

The data is stored in ‘pits’ and ‘bumps’ on the spiral track. A red laser is used to
read and write the data. CDs and DVDs can be designated R (write once only) or
RW (can be written to or read from many times).
DVD technology is slightly different to that used in CDs. One of the main
differences is the use of dual layering which considerably increases the
storage capacity. This means that there are two individual recording
layers. Two layers of a standard DVD are joined together with a transparent
(polycarbonate) spacer, and a very thin reflector is sandwiched between the
two layers. Reading and writing of the second layer is done by a red laser
focusing at a fraction of a millimetre difference compared to the first layer.
single spiral track runs
from the centre to outer
part of disk

pits or bumps

EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3C
The outer part of an optical disk runs faster than the inner part of the disk.
Find out how manufacturers have overcome this issue with regards to disk
data capacity and data access time.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 75 26/04/19 7:27 AM

76
3 Hardware
3

polycarbonate layer first layer

second layer

laser reads
layer 2

laser reads
layer 1

polycarbonate layer

▲ Figure 3.8 Dual layering in a DVD
Standard, single layer DVDs still have a larger storage capacity than CDs because
the ‘pit’ size and track width are both smaller. This means that more data can be
stored on the DVD surface. DVDs use lasers with a wavelength of 650 nanometres;
CDs use lasers with a wavelength of 780 nanometres. The shorter the wavelength
of the laser light, the greater the storage capacity of the medium.
» Blu-ray discs are another example of optical storage media. However, they
are fundamentally different to DVDs in their construction and in the way
they carry out read-write operations.
» Blu-ray uses a blue laser, rather than a red laser, to carry out read and write
operations; the wavelength of blue light is only 405 nanometres (compared
to 650 nm for red light).
» Using blue laser light means that the ‘pits’ and ‘bumps’ can be much smaller;
consequently, a Blu-ray can store up to five times more data than a DVD.
» Blu-ray uses a single 1.1mm thick polycarbonate disk; DVDs use a sandwich
of two 0.6mm thick disks.
» Using two sandwiched layers can cause birefringence (light is refracted into
two separate beams causing reading errors); because Blu-ray uses only one
layer, the discs do not suffer from birefringence.
» Blu-ray discs automatically come with a secure encryption system which
helps to prevent piracy and copyright infringement.
Table 3.4 summarises the main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray.

disk type

laser
colour
wavelength
of laser light disk construction

track pitch
(distance
between tracks)

CD red 780nm single 1.2mm
polycarbonate layer
1.60μm

DVD red 650nm two 0.6mm
polycarbonate layers
0.74μm

Blu-ray blue 405nm single 1.1mm
polycarbonate layer
0.30μm

nm = 10−9metres
μm = 10−6metres
▲ Table 3.4 Main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray
All these optical storage media are used as back-up systems (for photos,
music and multimedia files). This also means that CDs and DVDs can be used
to transfer files between computers. Manufacturers sometimes supply their
software (such as printer drivers) on CDs and DVDs. When the software is
supplied in this way, the disk is usually in a read-only format.
The most common use of DVD and Blu-ray is the supply of movies or games. The
memory capacity of CDs is not big enough to store most movies.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 76 26/04/19 7:27 AM

77
3.1 Computers and their components
3

3.1.2 Input and output devices
This section will consider laser printers, inkjet printers, 3D printers, speakers,
microphones, screens and sensors.
Laser printers
Laser printers use dry powder ink rather than liquid ink and make use of the
properties of static electricity to produce the text and images. Unlike inkjet
printers, for example, laser printers print the whole page in one go. Colour laser
printers use four toner cartridges – blue, cyan, magenta and black. Although
the actual technology is different to monochrome printers, the printing method
is similar, but colour dots are used to build up the text and images.
When a user wishes to print a document using a laser printer, the following
sequence of events takes place.
Stage Description of what happens
1 data from the document is sent to a printer driver
2 printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer

can understand

3 check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is
available to print (is it busy? is it off-line? is it out of ink? and so on)
4 data is sent to the printer and stored in a temporary memory known as a

printer buffer

5 printing drum given a positive charge. As this drum rotates, a laser beam
scans across it removing the positive charge in certain areas, leaving
negatively charged areas which exactly match the text/images of the page
to be printed

6 drum is coated with positively charged toner (powdered ink). Since the toner is
positively charged, it only sticks to the negatively charged parts of the drum

7 negatively charged sheet of paper is rolled over the drum
8 toner on the drum sticks to the paper to produce an exact copy of the page

sent to the printer

9 to prevent the paper sticking to the drum, the electric charge on the paper

is removed after one rotation of the drum

10 the paper goes through a fuser (a set of heated rollers), where the heat

melts the ink so that it fixes permanently to the paper

11 a discharge lamp removes all the electric charge from the drum so it is

ready to print the next page
▲ Table 3.5 Sequence to print using a laser printer
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3D
A recent development is PRAM (parameter RAM) or PCRAM (phase-change
RAM) which utilises chalogenide glass. This is glass containing elements
such as sulphur, antimony, selenium, germanium or tellurium. Chalogenide
compounds used in PRAMs/PCRAMs can be changed between the
amorphous (glass-like) state and crystalline state, which changes the optical
and electrical properties allowing the storage of data when used as a film on
the surface of optical media.
Find out more about this technology and determine whether this could result
in the demise of the current solid state removable devices.

▲ Figure 3.9 A laser printer

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 77 26/04/19 7:27 AM

78
3 Hardware
3

Inkjet printers
Inkjet printers are made up of
» a print head consisting of nozzles that spray droplets of ink onto the paper
to form characters
» an ink cartridge or cartridges; either one cartridge for each colour (blue,
yellow and magenta) and a black cartridge, or one single cartridge
containing all three colours and black (note: some systems use six colours)
» a stepper motor and belt which moves the print head assembly across the
page from side to side
» a paper feed which automatically feeds the printer with pages as they are
required.
The ink droplets are currently produced using one of two technologies: thermal
bubble or piezoelectric.
Thermal bubble – tiny resistors create localised heat which makes the ink
vaporise. This causes the ink to form a tiny bubble, as the bubble expands
some of the ink is ejected from the print head onto the paper. When the
bubble collapses, a small vacuum is created which allows fresh ink to
be drawn into the print head. This continues until the printing cycle is
completed.
Piezoelectric – a crystal is located at the back of the ink reservoir for each
nozzle. The crystal is given a tiny electric charge which makes it vibrate. This
vibration forces ink to be ejected onto the paper and at the same time more ink
is drawn in for further printing.
When a user wishes to print a document using an inkjet printer, the following
sequence of events takes place. Whatever technology is used, the basic steps in
the printing process are the same.
Stage Description of what happens
1 data from the document is sent to a printer driver
2 printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer
can understand
3 check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is
available to print (is it busy? is it off-line? is it out of ink? and so on)
4 data is sent to the printer and stored in a temporary memory known as a
printer buffer
5 a sheet of paper is fed into the main body of the printer. A sensor detects
whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of paper (or
the paper is jammed), an error message is sent back to the computer
6 as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from
side to side across the paper printing the text or image. The four ink colours
are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour
7 at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very
slightly to allow the next line to be printed. This continues until the whole
page has been printed
8 if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage
5 is repeated until the buffer is empty
9 once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the processor
in the computer, which is a request for more data to be sent to the printer. The
process continues until the whole of the document has been printed

▲ Table 3.6 Sequence to print using a laser printer

▲ Figure 3.10 An inkjet
printer

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 78 26/04/19 7:27 AM

79
3.1 Computers and their components
3

3D printers

▲ Figure 3.11 A 3D printer
3D printers are used to produce working, solid objects. They are primarily based
on inkjet and laser printer technology. The solid object is built up layer by layer
using materials such as powdered resin, powdered metal, paper or ceramic.
The artificial bone framework in Figure 3.12 was made from many layers (100μm
thick) of powered metal using a technology known as binder 3D printing.
Various types of 3D printers exist; they range from the size of a microwave
oven up to the size of a small car.
3D printers use additive manufacturing (the object is built up layer by layer);
this is in contrast to the more traditional method of subtractive manufacturing
(removal of material to make the object). For example, making a statue using
a 3D printer would involve building it up layer by layer using powdered stone
until the final object was formed. The subtractive method would involve
carving the statue out of solid stone (removing the stone not required) until
the final item was produced. Similarly, CNC machining removes metal to form
an object; 3D printing would produce the same item by building up the object
from layers of powdered metal.
Direct 3D printing uses inkjet technology; a print head can move left to right
as in a normal printer. However, the print head can also move up and down to
build up the layers of an object.
Binder 3D printing is similar to direct 3D printing. However, this method uses
two passes for each of the layers; the first pass sprays dry powder and then on
the second pass a binder (a type of glue) is sprayed to form a solid layer.
Newer technologies use lasers and UV light to harden liquid polymers; this
further increases the diversity of products which can be made.

▲ Figure 3.12 Artificial
bone framework made
using an industrial
3D printer

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 79 26/04/19 7:27 AM

80
3 Hardware
3

Speakers and microphones
Speakers
Digitised sound stored in a file on a computer can be converted into sound as
follows:
» The digital data is first passed through a digital to analogue converter (DAC)
where it is converted into an electric current.
» This is then passed through an amplifier (since the current generated
by the DAC will be small) to create a current large enough to drive a
loudspeaker.
» This electric current is then fed to a loudspeaker where it is converted into
sound.
The following schematic shows how this is done.

▲ Figure 3.13 Digital to analogue conversion
As Figure 3.13 shows, if the sound is stored in a computer file, it must first
pass through a digital to analogue converter (DAC) to convert the digital
data into an electric current which can be used to drive the loudspeaker.
Figure 3.14 shows how a loudspeaker can convert electric signals into sound
waves.

sound waves
plastic or
paper cone

sound waves
produced

coil of wire
wrapped
around an
iron core

electric current fed to wire
permanent
magnet

▲ Figure 3.14 Diagram showing how a loudspeaker works
» When an electric current flows through a coil of wire that is wrapped around
an iron core, the core becomes a temporary electromagnet; a permanent
magnet is also positioned very close to this electromagnet.
» As the electric current through the coil of wire varies, the induced magnetic
field in the iron core also varies. This causes the iron core to be attracted
towards the permanent magnet and as the current varies this will cause the
iron core to vibrate.
» Since the iron core is attached to a cone (made from paper or thin synthetic
material), this causes the cone to vibrate, producing sound.
The rate at which the DAC can translate the digital output into analogue
voltages is known as the sampling rate. If the DAC is a 16-bit device, then it
speaker

1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 DAC amplifer

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 80 26/04/19 7:27 AM

81
3.1 Computers and their components
3

can accept numbers between +32 767 (216 – 1) and –32 768 (216); the digital
value containing all zeros is ignored.
Microphones
Microphones are either built into the computer or are external devices
connected through the USB port or through wireless connectivity.
Figure 3.15 shows how a microphone can convert sound waves into an electric
current. The current produced can either be stored as sound (on, for example, a
CD), amplified and sent to a loudspeaker, or sent to a computer for storage.

sound waves

cone

diaphragm

coil wrapped around
a permanent magnet

output from
the microphone

▲ Figure 3.15 Diagram of how a microphone works
» When sound is created, it causes the air to vibrate.
» When a diaphragm in the microphone picks up the air vibrations, the
diaphragm also begins to vibrate.
» A copper coil is wrapped around a permanent magnet and the coil is
connected to the diaphragm using a cone. As the diaphragm vibrates, the
cone moves in and out causing the copper coil to move backwards and
forwards.
» This forwards and backwards motion causes the magnetic field around the
permanent magnet to be disturbed, inducing an electric current.
» The electric current is then either amplified or sent to a recording device.
The electric current is analogue in nature.
The electric current output from the microphone can also be sent to a computer
where a sound card converts the current into a digital signal which can then be
stored in the computer. The following diagram shows what happens when the
word ‘hut’ is picked up by a microphone and is converted into digital values:

▲ Figure 3.16 Analogue to digital conversion
Look at Figure 3.16. The word ‘hut’ (in the form of a sound wave) has been
picked up by a microphone; this is then converted using an analogue to digital
converter (ADC) into digital values which can then be stored in a computer or
manipulated as required using appropriate software.
Screens
Screens are used to show the output from a computer. Modern screens use an LCD,
backlit with LEDs or the newer organic light emitting diode (OLED) technology.

1000 0001
0001 1110
1000 1110
0001 1100
1100 1100
1101 1110
sound wave for ‘HUT’ digital value after conversion

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 81 26/04/19 7:27 AM

82
3 Hardware
3

Figure 3.17 shows a simplified form of how OLED technology works.

▲ Figure 3.17 Simplified form of how OLED technology works
OLEDs use organic materials (made up of carbon compounds) to create flexible
semiconductors. Organic films are sandwiched between two charged electrodes
(one is a metallic cathode and the other a glass anode). When an electric field
is applied to the electrodes, they give off light. This means that no form of
back lighting is required. This allows for very thin screens. It also means that
there is no longer a need to use LCD technology, since OLED is a self-contained
system.
Screen displays are based on the pixel (the smallest picture element) concept
where each screen pixel is made up of three sub-pixels, which are red, green
and blue. By varying the intensity of the three sub-pixels, it is possible to
generate millions of colours. The greater the number of pixels on a screen,
the greater is the screen resolution (the number of pixels which can be
viewed horizontally and vertically on screen; for example, 1680 × 1080
pixels). LCD and OLED screens use this type of pixel matrix to make up the
picture.

The ‘purple’ pixel is made up of a combination of
three sub-pixels, which are red, green and blue, in the
required intensity, to ‘fool’ the eye into seeing a
purple dot on the screen. The whole screen is filled
with thousands of these tiny pixels.

▲ Figure 3.18 The pixel matrix
Touch screens (which act as both input and output devices) also make use
of LCD and OLED technology. They are particularly used in mobile phones and
tablets.
We shall now consider LCD capacitive and resistive touch screen technologies.
Capacitive
» Made up of many layers of glass that act like a capacitor creating electric
fields between the glass plates in layers.
» When the top glass layer is touched, the electric current changes and the
coordinates where the screen was touched are determined by an on board
microprocessor.
Benefits
» Medium cost technology.
» Screen visibility is good even in strong sunlight.
» Permits multi-touch capability.
» Screen is very durable; it takes a major impact to break the glass.
negative charges

positive charges

glass or plastic top layer
metallic cathode (negative charge)
emissive layer
conductive layer
glass anode (positive charge)
glass or plastic bottom layer

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 82 26/04/19 7:27 AM

83
3.1 Computers and their components
3

Drawbacks
» Only allows use of bare fingers as the form of input; although the latest
screens permit the use of a special stylus to be used.
Resistive
» Makes use of an upper layer of polyester (a form of plastic) and a bottom
layer of glass.
» When the top polyester layer is touched, the top layer and bottom layer
complete a circuit.
» Signals are then sent out, which are interpreted by a microprocessor
and the calculations determine the coordinates of where the screen was
touched.
Benefits
» Relatively inexpensive technology.
» Possible to use bare fingers, gloved fingers or stylus to carry out an input
operation.
Drawbacks
» Screen visibility is poor in strong sunlight.
» Does not permit multi-touch capability.
» Screen durability is only fair; it is vulnerable to scratches and the screen
wears out through time.
Virtual headsets
Virtual reality has now been around for many years and has many applications.
For example, it is possible to ‘walk around’ inside dangerous areas – such as a
nuclear power plant – without actually being there.
It allows engineers to plan modifications or repairs to a plant in complete
safety and to try out different scenarios first before implementing them. One
of the devices used is a virtual reality headset which gives the engineer the
feeling of being there. We will now describe how these devices work.
» Video is sent from a computer to the headset (either using an HDMI cable or
a smartphone fitted into the headset).
» Two feeds are sent to an LCD/OLED display (sometimes two screens are
used, one for the left side of the image and one for the right side of the
image); lenses placed between the eyes and the screen allow for focusing
and reshaping of the image/video for each eye, thus giving a 3D effect and
adding to the realism.
» Most headsets use 110° field of view which is enough to give a pseudo 360°
surround image/video.
» A frame rate of 60 to 120 images per second is used to give a true/realistic
image.
» As the user moves their head (up and down or left to right), a series of
sensors and/or LEDs measure this movement, which allows the image/video
on the screen to react to the user’s head movements (sensors are usually
gyroscopic or accelerometers; LEDs are used in conjunction with mini
cameras to further monitor head movements).
» Headsets also use binaural sound (surround sound) so that the speaker
output appears to come from behind, from the side or from a distance,
giving very realistic 3D sound.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 83 26/04/19 7:27 AM

84
3 Hardware
3

» Some headsets also use infrared sensors to monitor eye movement (in
addition to head movement), which allows the depth of field on the screen
to be more realistic; an example of this is to make objects in the foreground
appear fuzzy when the user’s eyes indicate they are looking into the
distance (and vice versa).
Sensors
Sensors are input devices which read or measure physical properties, such as
temperature, pressure, acidity, and so on.
Real data is analogue in nature – this means it is constantly changing and
does not have a discrete value. Analogue data usually requires some form of
interpretation, for example, the temperature shown on a mercury thermometer
requires the user to look at the height of the mercury to work out the
temperature. The temperature, therefore, can have an infinite number of values
depending on the precision of how the height of the mercury is measured.
Equally, an analogue clock requires the user to look at the hands on the clock
face. The area swept out by the hands allows the number of hours and minutes
to be interpreted. There are many other examples.
Computers cannot make any sense of these physical quantities and the data
needs to be converted into a digital format. This is usually achieved by an
analogue to digital converter (ADC). This device converts physical values into
discrete digital values.
ADC

analogue data digital data
1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 ...

▲ Figure 3.19 Converting analogue data into digital data
When a computer is used to control devices, such as a motor or a valve,
it is often necessary to use a digital to analogue converter (DAC), since
these devices need analogue data to operate in many cases. Frequently,
an actuator is used in these control applications. Although these are
technically output devices, they are mentioned here since they are an
integral part of the control system. An actuator is an electromechanical
device such as a relay, solenoid or motor. Note that a solenoid is an example
of a digital actuator as part of the device is connected to a computer which
opens and closes a circuit as required. When energized, the solenoid may
operate a plunger or armature to control, for example, a fuel injection
system. Other actuators, such as motors and valves, may require a DAC so
that they receive an electric current rather than a simple digital signal
direct from the computer.
Notice the importance of (positive) feedback, which is where the output
from the system can affect the next input. This is due to the fact that sensor
readings may cause the microprocessor to alter a valve or a motor, for example,
which will then change the next reading taken by the sensor. So the output
from the microprocessor will impact on the next input received as it attempts
to bring the system within the desired parameters.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 84 26/04/19 7:27 AM

85
3.1 Computers and their components
3

Table 3.7 shows a number of common sensors and examples of their
applications.
Sensor Example applications
temperature n control a central heating system
n control/monitor a chemical process
n control/monitor temperature in a greenhouse

moisture/humidity n control/monitor moisture/humidity levels in soil/air in a

greenhouse
n monitor dampness levels in an industrial application (for
example, monitor moisture in a paint spray booth in a car
factory)

light n switch street lighting on at night and off during the day

n monitor/control light levels in a greenhouse
n switch on car headlights when it gets dark
infrared/motion n turn on windscreen wipers on a car when it rains
n detect an intruder in a burglar alarm system
n count people entering or leaving a building
pressure n detect intruders in a burglar alarm system
n check weight (such as the weight of a vehicle)
n monitor/control a process where gas pressure is important
acoustic/sound n pick up noise levels (such as footsteps or breaking glass) in a

burglar alarm system
n detect noise of liquids dripping from a pipe

gas (such as O2
or CO2)

n monitor pollution levels in a river or air
n measure O2 and CO2 levels in a greenhouse
n check for CO2 or NO2 leaks in a power station
pH n monitor/control acidity/alkalinity levels in soil

n monitor pollution in rivers

magnetic field n detect changes in in cell phones, CD players, and so on
n used in anti-lock braking systems in motor vehicles

▲ Table 3.7 Common sensors and examples of applications
Sensors are used in both monitoring and control applications. There is a subtle
difference between how these two methods work. The flowchart (Figure 3.21
overleaf) shows a simplification of the process.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 85 26/04/19 7:27 AM

86
3 Hardware
3

sensors send signals to the
microprocessor or computer
the signals are converted to
digital (if necessary) using an
analogue to digital converter
(ADC)
the microprocessor or computer
analyses the data received
by checking it against stored
values

if new data is outside the
acceptable range, a warning
message is sent to a screen
or an alarm is activated

if the new data is outside the
acceptable range, the
microprocessor or computer
sends signals to control valves,
motors, and so on

the microprocessor or computer
has no effect on what is
being monitored – it is simply
‘watching’ the process

the output from the system
affects the next set of inputs
from the sensors
feedback loop
monitoring system control system
▲ Figure 3.20 Sensors for monitoring and controlling systems
Table 3.8 shows some examples of monitoring and control applications of
sensors.
Examples of monitoring Examples of control
n monitoring a patient in a hospital
for vital signs such as heart rate,
temperature, and so on
n checking for intruders in a burglar alarm
system
n checking the temperature levels in a car
engine
n monitoring pollution levels in a river

n turning street lights on at night and
turning them off again during daylight
n controlling the temperature in a central
heating/air conditioning system
n controlling the traffic lights at a road
junction
n operating anti-lock brakes on a car
when necessary
n controlling the environment in a
greenhouse
▲ Table 3.8 Examples of monitoring and control applications of sensors
One of the most common uses of sensors in modern times is in the monitoring
and control of a number of functions in motor vehicles and aeroplanes. Look at
Figure 3.21 showing a typical modern car and its many sensors used to control
or monitor several functions.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 86 26/04/19 7:27 AM

87
3.1 Computers and their components
3

ABS
engine
management
front airbag sensors

collision
avoidance
system
rear lighting control

front lighting
control

▲ Figure 3.21 Sensors on a typical modern car

ACTIVITY 3A
1 a) i) Describe three differences between RAM and ROM.
ii) Compare the relative advantages and disadvantages of SRAM and
DRAM.
Include examples of where each type of memory would be used in
a computer.

Below is an in-depth look at just one of the sensor systems labelled on
Figure 3.21.
Anti-lock braking systems (on cars)
Anti-lock braking systems (ABS) on cars use magnetic field sensors to stop the
wheels locking up on the car if the brakes have been applied too sharply.
» When one of the car wheels rotates too slowly (it is locking up), a magnetic
field sensor sends data to a microprocessor.
» The microprocessor checks the rotation speed of the other three wheels.
» If they are different (rotating faster), the microprocessor sends a signal to
the braking system and the braking pressure to the affected wheel is reduced.
» The wheel’s rotational speed is then increased to match the other wheels.
» The checking of the rotational speed using these magnetic field sensors is
done several times a second and the braking pressure to all the wheels can
be constantly changing to prevent any of the wheels locking up under heavy
braking.
» This is felt as a ‘judder’ on the brake pedal as the braking system is constantly
switched off and on to equalise the rotational speed of all four wheels.
» If one of the wheels is rotating too quickly, braking pressure is increased to
that wheel until it matches the other three.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 87 26/04/19 7:27 AM

88
3 Hardware
3

b) Secondary storage can be magnetic, optical or solid state.
Describe two features of each type of storage which differentiates it
from the other two types.
2 a) Explain the main differences in operation of a laser printer compared
with an inkjet printer.
b) i) Name one application of a laser printer and one application of an
inkjet printer.
ii) For each of your named applications in part b) i), give a reason why
the chosen printer is the most suitable.
3 An art gallery took several photographs of a valuable, fragile painting.
The images were sent to a computer where they were processed by a 3D
printing application. A 3D printout of the painting was produced showing
the texture of the oil paint, canvas and any flaws in the painting.
Give reasons why the art gallery would wish to make this 3D replica.
4 The following diagram shows a schematic of a microprocessor-controlled
street lighting system.
sensor

ADC

DAC

street
light

microprocessor

The microprocessor is used to control the operation of the street lamp.
The lamp is fitted with a light sensor which constantly sends data to the
microprocessor. The data value from the sensor changes according to
whether it is sunny, cloudy, raining, night time, and so on.
Describe how the microprocessor would be used to automatically switch
on the light at night and switch it off again when it becomes light. Include
a feature to stop the light constantly flickering on and off when it becomes
overcast or cars go past with full headlights at night.

EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3E
1 Look at this simplified diagram of a keyboard;
the letter H has been pressed. Explain:
a) how pressing the letter H has been
recognised by the computer
b) how the computer manages the very slow
process of inputting data from a keyboard.

2 a) Describe how these types of pointing devices
work.
i) Mechanical mouse
ii) Optical mouse
b) Connectivity between mouse and computer
can be through USB cable or wireless.
Explain these two types of connectivity.

conductive layers

H
J letter H has been pressed and
now makes contact with bottom
conductive layer
letter H
interpreted
by computer insulating layer

G

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 88 26/04/19 7:27 AM

89
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

3.2.1 Logic gates
Electronic circuits in computers, many memories and controlling devices are
made up of thousands of logic gates. Logic gates take binary inputs and
produce a binary output. Several logic gates combined together form a logic
circuit and these circuits are designed to carry out a specific function. The
checking of the output from a logic gate or logic circuit can be done using a
truth table.
This section will consider the function and role of logic gates, logic circuits
and truth tables. A number of possible applications of logic circuits will also
be considered. A reference to Boolean algebra will be made throughout this
section, although this is covered in more depth in Chapter 15.
Six different logic gates will be considered in this section.

NOT gate AND gate OR gate

NAND gate NOR gate XOR gate
▲ Figure 3.22 Six types of logic gate
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3F
Another new screen technology is known as quantum LED (QLED), which is
in direct competition with organic (LED). Look at this statement:
‘QLED televisions are simply LED televisions that use quantum dots to
enhance their overall performance in key picture quality areas.’
Find out the main differences between QLED and OLED technologies.

3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits

Key terms
Logic gates – electronic circuits which rely on
‘on/off’ logic. The most common ones are NOT, AND,
OR, NAND, NOR and XOR.
Logic circuit – formed from a combination of logic gates
and designed to carry out a particular task. The output
from a logic circuit will be 0 or 1.

Truth table – a method of checking the output from
a logic circuit. They use all the possible binary input
combinations depending on the number of inputs;
for example, two inputs have 22 (4) possible binary
combinations, three inputs will have 23 (8) possible
binary combinations, and so on.
Boolean algebra – a form of algebra linked to logic
circuits and based on TRUE and FALSE.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 89 02/05/19 12:35 PM

90
3 Hardware
3

3.2.2 Truth tables
Truth tables are used to trace the output from a logic gate or logic circuit. The
NOT gate is the only logic gate with one input; the other five gates have two
inputs. When constructing truth tables, all possible combinations of 1s and 0s
which can be input are considered. For the NOT gate (one input) there are only
21 (2) possible binary combinations. For all other gates (two inputs), there are
22 (4) possible binary combinations.
For logic circuits, the number of inputs can be more than 2; for example, three
inputs give a possible 23 (8) binary combinations. And for four inputs, the
number of possible binary combinations is 24 (16). It is clear that the number
of possible binary combinations is a multiple of the number 2 in every case.
Table 3.9 summarises this.
Inputs Inputs Inputs
A B A B C A B C D
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1
1 0 0 0 1 0 0
1 0 1 0 1 0 1
1 1 0 0 1 1 0
1 1 1 0 1 1 1
1 0 0 0
1 0 0 1
1 0 1 0
1 0 1 1
1 1 0 0
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 0
1 1 1 1

▲ Table 3.9
3.2.3 The function of the six logic gates
NOT gate
A X
▲ Figure 3.23 NOT gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if the input A is NOT 1
How to write this
X = NOT A (logic notation)
X = A–
(Boolean algebra)

Truth table
Input Output
A X
0 1
1 0
▲ Table 3.10

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 90 02/05/19 12:36 PM

91
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

AND gate
A X
B
▲ Figure 3.24 AND gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if input A is 1 and input B
is 1
How to write this
X = A AND B (logic notation)
X = A.B (Boolean algebra)

Truth table
Inputs Output
A B X
0 0 0
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 1
▲ Table 3.11

OR gate
A X
B
▲ Figure 3.25 OR gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if input A is 1 or input B
is 1
How to write this
X = A OR B (logic notation)
X = A + B (Boolean algebra)

Truth table
Inputs Output
A B X
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 1
▲ Table 3.12

NAND gate (NOT AND)
A X B
▲ Figure 3.26 NAND gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if input A is NOT 1 or
input B is NOT 1
How to write this
X = A NAND B (logic notation)
X = A.B (Boolean algebra)

Truth table
Inputs Output
A B X
0 0 1
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0
▲ Table 3.13

NOR gate (NOT OR)
A X
B
▲ Figure 3.27 NOR gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if:
input A is NOT 1 and input B is NOT 1
How to write this
X = A NOR B (logic notation)
X = A + B (Boolean algebra)

Truth table
Inputs Output
A B X
0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
▲ Table 3.14

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 91 02/05/19 12:36 PM

92
3 Hardware
3

XOR gate
A X
B
▲ Figure 3.28 XOR gate
Description
The output, X, is 1 if (input A is 1 AND input B
is NOT 1) OR (input A is NOT 1 AND input B
is 1)
How to write this
X = A XOR B (logic notation)
X = (A.B) + (A.B) (Boolean algebra)
(Note: this is sometimes written as:
(A + B) . A.B)

Truth table
Inputs Output
A B X
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0
▲ Table 3.15

EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3G
Using truth tables show that X = (A.B) + (A.B) and X = (A + B) . A.B both
represent the XOR logic gate.
You will notice, in the Boolean algebra, three new symbols.
» A dot (.) represents the AND operation (it can be written as ∧).
» A plus sign (+) represents the OR operation (it can be written as ∨).
» A dash above a letter (for example, A) represents the NOT operation.
3.2.4 Logic circuits
When logic gates are combined to carry out a particular function, such as
controlling a robot, they form a logic circuit.
The output from the logic circuit is checked using a truth table. The following
three examples show how to:
» produce a truth table
» design a logic circuit from a given logic statement/Boolean algebra
» design a logic circuit to carry out an actual safety function.
Produce a truth table for the following logic circuit (note the use of at junctions):
A
B

part 1 part 2 part 3
X

C

P

Q

R

Example 3.1

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 92 02/05/19 12:36 PM

93
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

Solution
There are three inputs to this logic circuit; therefore, there will be eight possible
binary values which can be input.
To show step-wise how the truth table is produced, the logic circuit has been split
up into three parts and intermediate values are shown as P, Q and R.
Part 1
This is the first part of the logic circuit; the first task is to find the intermediate
values P and Q.
A
B

C

P

Q

The value of P is found from the AND gate where the inputs are A and B. The
value of Q is found from the NOR gate where the inputs are B and C. An
intermediate truth table is produced:
Inputs Outputs
A B C P Q
0 0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0
1 0 0 0 1
1 0 1 0 0
1 1 0 1 0
1 1 1 1 0
Part 2
The second part of the logic circuit has P and Q as inputs and the intermediate
output, R.
Q
P R
This produces the following intermediate
truth table (Note: even though there are
only two inputs to the logic gate, we have
generated eight binary values in Part 1
and these must all be used in this second
truth table).

Inputs Output
P Q R
0 1 1
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 1 1
0 0 0
1 0 1
1 0 1

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 93 26/04/19 7:27 AM

94
3 Hardware
3

Part 3
The final part of the logic circuit has R
and C as inputs and the final output, X.

C
R X
This gives the third intermediate truth
table.
Putting all three intermediate truth
tables together produces the final truth
table which represents the original
logic circuit.
Inputs Intermediate values Output
A B C P Q R X
0 0 0 0 1 1 1
0 0 1 0 0 0 1
0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 0 1
1 0 0 0 1 1 1
1 0 1 0 0 0 1
1 1 0 1 0 1 1
1 1 1 1 0 1 0

ACTIVITY 3B
Produce truth tables for each of the following logic circuits. You are advised to split them up into
intermediate parts to help eliminate errors.
A
a) b) c)

d) e)

B

B
X
A

C

X

X

B
A

C

A

B

X

X

B
A

C

Inputs Output
R C X
1 0 1
0 1 1
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 94 26/04/19 7:27 AM

95
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3 A safety system uses three inputs to a logic circuit. An alarm, X, sounds if input A
represents ON and input B represents OFF, or if input B represents ON and input C
represents OFF.
Produce a logic circuit and truth table to show the conditions which cause the
output X to be 1.

Example 3.2

Solution
The first thing to do is to write down the logic statement representing the
scenario in this example. To do this, it is necessary to recall that ON = 1 and OFF
= 0 and also that 0 is considered to be NOT 1.
So, we get the following logic statement:
X = 1 if (A = 1 AND
B = NOT 1)

OR (B = 1 AND
C = NOT 1)

this equates to
A is ON and B
is OFF

the two parts are
connected by the
OR gate

this equates to
B is ON AND
C is OFF
Part 1 Part 2 Part 3
This statement can also be written in Boolean algebra as:
(A.B) + (B.C)

The logic circuit is made up of three parts as shown in the logic statement. We
will produce the logic gate for the Part 1 and Part 3, then join both parts together
with the OR gate.
A

B
Part 1 Part 3

B

C

Now, combining both parts with Part 2 (the OR gate) gives us:
A

B
Part 1 Part 2

Part 3
C

X

There are two ways to produce the truth table.
l Trace through the logic circuit using the method described in Example 3.1.
l Use the original logic statement; this allows you to check that your logic
circuit is correct.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 95 26/04/19 7:27 AM

96
3 Hardware
3

ACTIVITY 3C
Draw the logic circuits and complete the truth tables for these logic
statements and Boolean algebra statements.
a) X = 1 if (A = 1 OR B = 1) OR (A = 0 AND B = 1)
b) Y = 1 if (A = 0 AND B = 0) AND (B = 0 OR C = 1)
c) T = 1 if (switch K is ON or switch L is ON) OR (switch K is ON and switch M
is OFF) OR (switch M is ON)
d) X = (A.B) + (B.C)
e) R = 1 if (switch A is ON and switch B is ON) AND (switch B is ON or switch
C is OFF)
We will use the second method in this example.
Inputs Intermediate values Output
A B C (A=1 AND
B=NOT 1)

(B=1 AND
C=NOT 1)
X
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 1 1
0 1 1 0 0 0
1 0 0 1 0 1
1 0 1 1 0 1
1 1 0 0 1 1
1 1 1 0 0 0

A wind turbine has a safety system which uses three inputs to a logic circuit. A
certain combination of conditions results in an output, X, from the logic circuit
being equal to 1. When the value of X = 1, the wind turbine is shut down.
The following table shows which parameters are being monitored and form the
three inputs to the logic circuit.
Parameter description Parameter Binary value Description of condition
turbine speed S 0 turbine speed ≤ 1000rpm
1 turbine speed > 1000rpm
bearing temperature T 0 bearing temperature ≤ 80 °C
1 bearing temperature > 80 °C
wind velocity W 0 wind velocity ≤ 120kph
1 wind velocity > 120kph
The output, X, will have a value of 1 if any of the following combination of
conditions occur:
l either turbine speed ≤ 1000 rpm and bearing temperature > 80 °C
l or turbine speed > 1000 rpm and wind velocity > 120 kph
l or bearing temperature ≤ 80 °C and wind velocity > 120 kph

Example 3.3

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 96 26/04/19 7:27 AM

97
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3
Design the logic circuit and complete the truth table to produce a value of X = 1
when either of the three conditions occur.
Solution
This is a different type of problem to those covered in Examples 3.1 and 3.2. This
time, a real situation is given and it is necessary to convert the information into a
logic statement and then produce the logic circuit and truth table. It is advisable in
problems as complex as this to produce the logic circuit and truth table separately
(based on the conditions given) and then check them against each other to see if
there are any errors.
Stage 1
The first thing to do is to convert each of the three statements into logic
statements. Use the information given in the table and the three condition
statements to find how the three parameters S, T and W, are linked. We usually
look for the key words AND, OR and NOT when converting actual statements
into logic.
We end up with these three logic statements:
1 turbine speed  1000 rpm and bearing temperature > 80 °C
logic statement: (S = NOT 1 AND T = 1)
2 turbine speed > 1000 rpm and wind velocity > 120 kph
logic statement: (S = 1 AND W = 1)
3 bearing temperature  80 °C and wind velocity > 120 kph
logic statement: (T = NOT 1 AND W = 1)
Stage 2
This produces three intermediate logic circuits:
1
T
S

2 S
W
3
W
T

Each of the three original statements were joined together by the word OR. So,
we need to join all of the three intermediate logic circuits by two OR gates to get
the final logic circuit.
We will start by joining 1 and 2 together using an OR gate.

W
T
S

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 97 26/04/19 7:27 AM

98
3 Hardware
3

Now, we connect this to logic circuit 3 to obtain the final logic circuit.

W

W

T
S

The final part is to produce the truth table. We will do this using the original
logic statement, since this method allows an extra check to be made on the final
logic circuit.
There were three parts to the problem, so the truth table will first evaluate each
part. Then, by applying OR gates, as shown below, the final value, X, is obtained:
1 (S = NOT 1 AND T = 1)
2 (S = 1 AND W = 1)
3 (T = NOT 1 AND W = 1)
We find the outputs from 1 and 2 and then OR these two outputs to obtain a
new intermediate, which we will label part 4.
We then OR parts 3 and 4 together to get the value of X.
Inputs Intermediate values Output
A B C 1
(S=NOT 1
AND T=1)
2
(S=1 AND
W=1)

3
(T=NOT 1
AND W=1)

4 X

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1
0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1
0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 0 1 0 1 1

ACTIVITY 3D
There are two scenarios described below. In each case, produce the logic
circuit and complete a truth table to represent the scenario.
a) A chemical process is protected by a logic circuit. There are three
inputs to the logic circuit representing key parameters in the chemical
process.
An alarm, X, will give an output value of 1 depending on certain
conditions in the chemical process.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 98 26/04/19 7:27 AM

99
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

3.2.5 Logic circuits in the real world
The design of logic circuits is considerably more complex than has, so far, been
described. We have discussed some of the fundamental theories, providing
sufficient coverage of the Cambridge International A Level syllabus. However, it
is worth discussing some of the more advanced aspects of logic circuit design,
to strengthen understanding.
Electronics companies need to consider the cost of components, ease of
fabrication and time constraints when designing and building logic circuits.
Ways electronics companies review logic circuit design include:
» using ‘off-the-shelf’ logic units and building up the logic circuit as a number
of ‘building blocks’
» simplifying the logic circuit as far as possible; this may be necessary
where room is at a premium (for example, building circuit boards for use in
satellites for space exploration).
This table describes the process conditions being monitored.
Parameter
description Parameter
Binary
value Description of condition

chemical
reaction rate

R 0 reaction rate < 40mol/l/sec
1 reaction rate  40mol/l/sec

process
temperature

T 0 temperature > 115°C
1 temperature  115 °C

concentration
of chemicals

C 0 concentration = 4mol
1 concentration > 4mol

An alarm, X, will generate the value 1 if:
either reaction rate < 40mol/l/sec
or concentration > 4mol AND temperature > 115°C
or reaction rate  40mol/l/sec AND temperature > 115°C.
b) A power station has a safety system controlled by a logic circuit. Three
inputs to the logic circuit determine whether the output, S, is 1.
When S = 1 the power station shuts down.
The following table describes the conditions being monitored.
Parameter
description Parameter
Binary
value Description of condition
gas temperature G 0 gas temperature  160 °C
1 gas temperature > 160 °C
reactor pressure R 0 reactor pressure  10 bar
1 reactor pressure > 10 bar

water
temperature

W 0 water temperature  120 °C
1 water temperature > 120 °C

Output, S, will generate a value of 1, if:
either gas temperature > 160°C AND water temperature  120°C
or gas temperature  160°C AND reactor pressure > 10bar
or water temperature > 120°C AND reactor pressure > 10bar.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 99 26/04/19 7:27 AM

100 3 Hardware
3

Using logic ‘building blocks’
One common ‘building block’ is the NAND gate. It is possible to build up any
logic gate, and therefore any logic circuit, by simply linking together a number
of NAND gates, such as:
» the AND gate
A
B
▲ Figure 3.29 AND gate made from NAND gates
» the OR gate
A
B
▲ Figure 3.30 OR gate made from NAND gates
» the NOT gate
A
▲ Figure 3.31 NOT gate made from NAND gates

ACTIVITY 3E
1 By drawing the truth tables, show that the three logic circuits shown
above can be used to represent AND, OR and NOT gates.
2 a) Show how the following logic circuit could be built using NAND gates only.
Complete truth tables for both logic circuits to show that they produce
identical outputs.
A
B

C

X

b) Show how the XOR gate could be built from NAND gates only.
Complete a truth table for your final design to show that it produces
the same output as a single XOR gate.
3 By drawing a truth table, discover which single logic gate has the same
function as the following logic circuit made up of NAND gates only.

X

B
A

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 100 26/04/19 7:27 AM

1013.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

Simplification of logic circuits
The second method involves the simplification of logic circuits. By reducing
the number of components, the cost of production can be less. This can also
improve reliability and make it easier to trace faults if they occur. This is
covered in more depth in Chapter 15.

3.2.6 Multi-input logic gates
This section looks at logic gates with more than two inputs (apart from the NOT
gate). Students are not expected to answer questions about multi-input logic
gates at Cambridge International AS Level, but this information is included here
for completeness and for those with an electronics background. This is intended to
complete the picture for interested students who may have seen multi-input gates
in other textbooks, or online, and it leads neatly into topics covered in Chapter 15.
Logic gates (apart from the NOT gate) can have more than two inputs. While it is

still acceptable to use two-input logic gates, it is worth considering the multi-
input option when designing logic circuits; they can simplify the overall result.

Multi-input AND gates
A
B

C

A
B
is the same as C

▲ Figure 3.32 Multi-input AND gate
Both sets of AND gates have the output A.B.C and they share identical truth tables.

Inputs Output
A B C A.B.C
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 1 0 0
0 1 1 0
1 0 0 0
1 0 1 0
1 1 0 0
1 1 1 1
▲ Table 3.16
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3H
By drawing a truth table, show which single logic gate has the same function
as the logic circuit drawn below.
A

B

X

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 101 4/30/19 7:48 AM

102 3 Hardware
3

Now consider the following:
A
B
C
D

A
B
C
D is the same as

▲ Figure 3.33 4-input AND gate
Both sets of AND gates have the output A.B.C.D and they share identical truth tables.

Inputs Output
A B C D A.B.C.D
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 0
0 0 1 1 0
0 1 0 0 0
0 1 0 1 0
0 1 1 0 0
0 1 1 1 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 0 0 1 0
1 0 1 0 0
1 0 1 1 0
1 1 0 0 0
1 1 0 1 0
1 1 1 0 0
1 1 1 1 1
▲ Table 3.17
Multi-input OR gates
A
B

C

is the same as
A
B
C

▲ Figure 3.34 Multi-input OR gate
Both sets of OR gates have the output A + B + C and they share identical truth tables.
Inputs Output
A B C A + B + C
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1
0 1 0 1
0 1 1 1
1 0 0 1
1 0 1 1
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 1
▲ Table 3.18

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 102 26/04/19 7:27 AM

1033.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

Now consider the following:
A
B
C
D

is the same as
A
B
C
D

▲ Figure 3.35 4-input OR gate
Both sets of OR gates have the output A + B + C + D and they share identical
truth tables.

Inputs Output
A B C D A + B + C + D
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 1
0 0 1 0 1
0 0 1 1 1
0 1 0 0 1
0 1 0 1 1
0 1 1 0 1
0 1 1 1 1
1 0 0 0 1
1 0 0 1 1
1 0 1 0 1
1 0 1 1 1
1 1 0 0 1
1 1 0 1 1
1 1 1 0 1
1 1 1 1 1
▲ Table 3.19
ACTIVITY 3F
1 a) Draw the following multi-input NAND gate using two-input NAND
gates only:
A
B
C
D
b) Construct the truth tables for the above 4-input NAND gate and for
your circuit drawn in part a). Confirm that they are identical.
2 a) Draw the following multi-input NOR gates using two-input NOR gates only.
A
B
C

A
B
C
D

b) Construct the truth tables for the above 3-input NOR gate and for your
equivalent circuit drawn in part a).
Confirm they are identical.

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 103 26/04/19 7:27 AM

104 3 Hardware
3

c) Construct the truth tables for the above 4-input NOR gate and for your
equivalent circuit drawn in part a).
Confirm they are identical.
3 Confirm that the following two logic circuits are identical by constructing
the truth tables for each circuit.

C

A
B
C

A
B

1 a) Many mobile phone and tablet manufacturers are moving to OLED screen
technology.
Give three reasons why this is happening. [3]
b) A television manufacturer makes the following advertising claim:
‘Our OLED screens allow the user to enjoy over one million vivid colours in
true-to-life vision.’
Comment on the validity of this claim. [4]
2 a) A company is developing a new games console. The game will be stored on a
ROM chip once the program to run the new game has been fully tested and
developed.
i) Give two advantages of putting the game’s program on a ROM chip. [2]
ii) Explain why the manufacturers would use an EPROM chip during
development. [2]
iii)The manufacturers are also using RAM chips on the internal circuit board.
Explain why they are doing this. [2]
iv)The games console will have four USB ports.
Apart from the need to attach games controllers, give reasons why USB
ports are incorporated. [2]
b) During development of the games console the plastic parts are being made by
a 3D printer.
Give two reasons why the manufacturer would use 3D printers. [2]
3 An air conditioning unit in a car is being controlled by a microprocessor and a
number of sensors.
a) Describe the main differences between control and monitoring of
a process. [2]
b) Describe how the sensors and microprocessor would be used to control the
air conditioning unit in the car.
Name at least two different sensors that might be used and explain the role of
positive feedback in your description.
You might find drawing a diagram of your intended process to
be helpful. [6]

End of chapter
questions

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 104 26/04/19 7:27 AM

1053.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3

4 The nine stages in printing a page using an inkjet printer are shown below.
They are not in the correct order.
Write the letters A to I so that the stages are in the correct order. [9]
A The data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory
known as a printer buffer.
B As the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves
from side to side across the paper printing the text or image. The four ink
colours are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final
colour.
C The data from the document is sent to a printer driver.
D Once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the
processor in the computer, which is a request for more data to be sent to the
printer. The whole process continues until the whole of the document has
been printed.
E The printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer
can understand.
F At the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very
slightly to allow the next line to be printed. This continues until the whole
page has been printed.
G A check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is
available to print (is it busy? is it off line? is it out of ink? and so on).
H If there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage
5 is repeated until the buffer is finally empty.
I A sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer, where a sensor
detects whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of
paper (or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to
the computer.
5 a) There are two types of RAM: dynamic RAM (DRAM) and static RAM
(SRAM). Five statements about DRAM and RAM are shown below. Copy
the diagram below and connect each statement to the appropriate type of
RAM. [5]
Statement Type of RAM

requires the data to be refreshed periodically in

order to retain data
has more complex circuitry DRAM

does not need to be refreshed as the circuit holds
the data as long as the power supply is on
requires higher power consumption which is
significant when used in battery-powered devices SRAM
used predominantly in cache memory of
processors where speed is important
b) Give three differences between RAM and ROM. [3]
➔

457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd 105 26/04/19 7:27 AM

106 3 Hardware
3

c) DVD-RAM and flash memory are two examples of storage devices.
Describe two differences in how they operate. [2]
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9608
Paper 13 Q4 June 2015
6 a) Three digital sensors, A, B and C, are used to monitor a process. The outputs
from the sensors are used as the inputs to a logic circuit. A signal, X, is output
from the logic circuit:
A logic
circuit B output X
C
Output, X, has a value of 1 if either of the following two conditions occur:
– Sensor A outputs the value 1 OR sensor B outputs the value 0.
– Sensor B outputs the value 1 AND sensor C outputs the value 0.
Draw a logic circuit to represent these conditions. [5]
b) Copy and complete the truth table for the logic circuit described in
part a). [4]
A B C working space X
0 0 0
0 0 1
0 1 0
0 1 1
1 0 0
1 0 1
1 1 0
1 1 1
c) Write a logic statement that describes the following logic circuit. [3]

X

B

C
A

Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9608
Paper 13 Q6 June 2015